[draft] Understanding JSX (#311)
solidjs/solid-docs-next: content/essentials/understanding-jsx.mdx

import { Aside } from "~/components/configurable/Aside";

# Understanding JSX

JSX is a syntax extension for JavaScript. 
It allows you to write HTML-like code inside your JavaScript file which keeps your rendering logic and content in the same place. 
This provides a concise and readable way to create and represent components.

## How Solid uses JSX

Solid was designed to align closely with HTML standards. 

> It offers a distinct advantage: copy/paste solutions from resources like Stack Overflow, and direct usage of templates from design tools.

Reviewer: I've reread this several times and I'm struggling to get a grasp of what you were trying to say. I would suggest rewriting this sentence. 

> It offers a distinct advantage, however: to copy/paste solutions from resources like Stack Overflow; and to allow direct usage of templates from design tools.

Something like that? I'm not sure.

> What sets Solid's apart is the ability to use JSX immediately as it returns DOM elements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solid sets itself apart by using JSX immediately as it returns DOM elements. 
```

This adds dynamic expressions that allow you to reference variables and functions within your HTML by using the `{ }` syntax:

```jsx
const animal = { breed: "cat", name: "Midnight" };
const element = <p>I have a {animal.breed} named {animal.name}!</p>;
```

This allows for the use of JavaScript content in the rendered output based on the application's state or logic.

Additionally, Solid's [reactive](/essentials/intro-to-reactivity) system introduces [fine-grained reactivity](/advanced/understanding-fine-grained-reactivity) with JSX.

> This ensures that only the necessary portions of the [DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction) are updated when changes occur in the underlying state, optimizing efficiency and overall performance.

Reviewer: Maybe add the DOM link earlier at the first time you mention DOM?

## Using JSX in Solid

### 1. Return a single root element

Unlike HTML, where you can have disconnected tags at the top level, JSX requires that a component's render method returns a single root element.

<Aside type="advanced">

> **Note**: When working with JSX, the system translates parts of your code into structured HTML that's placed at the start of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: When working with JSX, the system translates parts of your code into structured HTML that is placed at the start of the file.
```

> Static elements, which don't change, are processed differently from dynamic ones, which might change based on data or user actions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static elements, which do not change, are processed differently from dynamic ones, which might change based on data or user actions. 
```

For dynamic elements, special markers are added for better handling during rendering.
<br/>
Having a single root ensures a consistent and manageable hierarchy, optimizing rendering and updates.
</Aside>

With its structured approach, JSX maintains the familiar nested, tree-like structure found in HTML. 
Consequently, parent-child relationships between elements are intuitive and easy to understand.

### 2. Close all tags

Self-closing tags are a must in JSX. 
Unlike in HTML, where elements like `<input>`, `<img>`, or `<br>` don't require explicit closure, JSX requires consistent self-closing tags. 
This ensures uniformity and helps avoid potential rendering issues.

### 3.  Properties vs. attributes

> At first glance, HTML attributes and JSX props may seem simlar, but they serve different purposes and behave differently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first glance, HTML attributes and JSX properties may seem similar, but they serve different purposes and behave differently.
```

Reviewer: > JSX props

Remember what I said about jargon/shorthand. Explain it the first time you mention it. You do so later in the document, so write it out fully here.

> Both offer ways to specify configurations or pass information, but they serve different purposes and behave differently in their respective realms: HTML for standard web content and JSX for Solid's component logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both offer ways to specify configurations or pass information, but they serve different purposes and behave differently in their respective realms — HTML for standard web content and JSX for Solid's component logic.
```

Reviewer: You know I love my em dashes.

#### HTML attributes

[HTML attributes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes) are values set directly on HTML elements. 
They supply additional information about an element, guiding its initial behavior and state. 
These attributes are often translated into properties on DOM objects once the browser parses the HTML.

> In JSX files, you'll use HTML attributes much the same way you would in regular HTML, with a few key differences due to the blend of HTML and JavaScript:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In JSX files, you'll use HTML attributes in much the same way you would in regular HTML, with a few key differences due to the blend of HTML and JavaScript:
```

* Event listeners such as `onClick` are in camelCase.

> * You can dynamically specify a value, you can replace the `"` and `"` with `{` and `}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In cases where you can dynamically specify a value, you can replace the `"` and `"` with `{` and `}`.
```

```jsx
<button class="myClass" onClick={handleClick}> Click me!</button>
```

<Aside>
  **Note**: If you wish to pass objects in JSX, such as when you are doing inline styling, you will have to use double curly braces `{{ }}`.

  ```jsx
  <button style={{
    color: 'red',
    font-size: '2rem',
  }}>
    Click me!
  </button>
  ```
</Aside>

### JSX properties (props)

> JSX properties, commonly known as "props", enable the passing of data and configurations to components in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSX properties, commonly known as "props," enable the passing of data and configurations to components in your application.
```

They are the bridge between the component and the data it requires, providing seamless data flow and dynamic interaction.

#### Core concepts

* **Static vs. dynamic attributes**: 

> In Solid's JSX, static attributes are integrated directly into the HTML template that is cloned. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Solid's JSX, static attributes are integrated directly into the cloned HTML template. 
```

> Dynamic attributes, however, are not hard-coded into the template, instead relying on state and other reactive data sources. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic attributes, however, are not hard-coded into the template, instead relying on the state and other reactive data sources. 
```

Reviewer: Wasn't sure about this one. Feel free to ignore if I'm incorrect.

This allows for content or styling of an element to change in response to interactions or other changes in the application's data.

* **Dynamic data transfer**: 
Props play a pivotal role when using dynamic data within your application. 
They empower components to react in real-time to data changes, resulting in a responsive application.

<Aside>
  Expressions, whether fixed or dynamic, get applied in the order defined within the JSX. 
  This sequence works for a wide range of DOM elements.

>   However, be cautious with elements like input types with `type='range'` - the order matters and can influence the element's behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  However, be cautious with elements like input types with `type='range'` - the order matters and it can influence the element's behavior.
```

</Aside>

> For how to use props effectively in Solid, explore the [components & props](/essentials/components-and-props) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For how to use props effectively in Solid, explore the [components and props](/essentials/components-and-props) page.
```

It offers a distinct advantage: copy/paste solutions from resources like Stack Overflow, and direct usage of templates from design tools.

What sets Solid's apart is the ability to return JSX. 
This adds dynamic expressions that allow you to reference variables and functions within your HTML by using the `{ }` syntax:

```jsx
const animal = { breed: "cat", name: "Midnight" };
const element = <p>I have a {animal.breed} named {animal.name}!</p>;
```

This allows for the injection of dynamic content into the rendered output based on the application's state or logic.

Additionally, Solid's [reactive](/essentials/intro-to-reactivity) system introduces [fine-grained reactivity](/advanced/understanding-fine-grained-reactivity) with JSX.
This ensures that only the necessary portions of the [DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction) are updated when changes occur in the underlying state, optimizing efficiency and overall performance.

## Using JSX in Solid

### 1. Return a single root element

Unlike HTML, where you can have disconnected tags at the top level, JSX requires that a component's render method returns a single root element.

> <Aside type="advanced">

Author: @modderme123 what are your thoughts on this aside, now?

**Note**: When working with JSX, the system translates parts of your code into structured HTML that's placed at the start of the file.
Static elements, which don't change, are processed differently from dynamic ones, which might change based on data or user actions. 
For dynamic elements, special markers are added for better handling during rendering.
<br/>

> This structure necessitates a single root element because JSX, unlike raw HTML, translates into a hierarchical object representation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Yes, solid compiles to only a single root node, but this is exactly like HTML, and Solid supports fragments which act like multiple nodes. If you want multiple nodes in separate parts of the page, it is pretty safe to just `render` two different nodes (state gets a bit more complicated, but how to abstract state in Solid is probably a separate docs page)

Author: How do you propose changing this to mention that? Or do you think it's fine as is?

### JSX Properties (props)

JSX properties, commonly known as "props", enable the passing of data and configurations to components in your application.
They are the bridge between the component and the data it requires, providing seamless data flow and dynamic interaction.

#### Core Concepts

* **Static vs. dynamic attributes**: 
In Solid's JSX, static attributes are integrated directly into the HTML template that is cloned. 
Dynamic attributes, however, are not hard-coded into the template, instead relying on state and other reactive data sources. 
This allows for content or styling of an element to change in response to interactions or other changes in the application's data.

* **Dynamic data transfer**: 
Props play a pivotal role when using dynamic data within your application. 
They empower components to react in real-time to data changes, resulting in a responsive application.

<Aside>
  Expressions, whether fixed or dynamic, get applied in the order defined within the JSX. 
  This sequence works for a wide range of DOM elements.
  However, be cautious with elements like input types with `type='range'` - the order matters and can influence the element's behavior.
</Aside>

> 

Author: refs are getting their own page! I'll tag you in it

## How Solid uses JSX
Solid was designed to align closely with HTML standards. It offers a distinct advantage: copy/paste solutions from resources like Stack Overflow, and direct usage of templates from design tools.

What sets Solid's apart is the ability to return JSX. 
This JSX can then be imported into other components, promoting reusability, modularity, and ease of maintenance throughout your application.

Additionally, Solid's [reactive](/essentials/intro-to-reactivity) system introduces [fine-grained reactivity](/advanced/understanding-fine-grained-reactivity) with JSX.
This ensures that only the necessary portions of the DOM are updated when changes occur in the underlying state, optimizing efficiency and overall performance.

### Integrating JavaScript expressions
In JSX, you can dynamically embed JavaScript directly into your markup using curly braces `{ }`.

```jsx
const animal = { breed: "cat", name: "Midnight" };
const element = <p>I have a {animal.breed} named {animal.name}!</p>;
```

This allows for the injection of dynamic content into the rendered output based on the application's state or logic.

### Structuring elements

> Unlike HTML, where you can have disconnected tags at the top level, JSX requires that a component's render method returns a single root element.

Reviewer 3: This is due to "everything" an javascript being in object. JSX is transpiled into a javascript object that looks something like this:
```json
"parentTag": {
  "tag": "div",
  "children": [{
    "tag": "h1",
    "content": "hello world"
  },
  {
    "tag": "p",
    "content": "description of hello world"
  }]
}
```

Author: Do you feel this is relevant information to this post, considering it's supposed to be aimed at intros to beginners?

I feel as though this information is more relevant to someone who is looking to understand how solid is built vs how it works.

Reviewer 3: I think it's relevant when we're talking about why tags need a single parent tag in JSX. I just thought it would be nice to mention for those that would ask why.

Author: It could be better suited for a more advanced guide on Solid, however. 

One of the biggest barriers with Solid's docs at the moment is they require a lot of in-depth knowledge of CS / web development which makes it incredibly intimidating. The people who do not have those fundamentals or are just looking to try a new framework could be off-put if a page designed to be 'beginner' starts delving into these things when they're just looking to get a grasp on the *what* vs the *why*. 

I'll hold onto this information so we can add it to a section later on - maybe we can design a guide for people who are looking to know how Solid works as a whole and include information on how it renders JSX, what the compiler does, etc.

Reviewer 2: I think this compilation is a bit misleading/incorrect... I quite liked this description here by Jarred Sumner of how Solid's JSX is compiled: https://github.com/oven-sh/bun/blob/79138c4c7cb72a5f84c9a81720a73d283d78b1be/src/js_parser.zig#L13105-L13116

<Aside>
Note: If you are looking to return multiple elements without adding an extra node to the DOM, you would need to use a fragment (`<> ... </>`).

```jsx
<>
  <h1>Title</h1>
  <p>Some text.</p>
</>
```
</Aside>

With its structured approach, JSX maintains the familiar nested, tree-like structure found in HTML. 
Consequently, parent-child relationships between elements are intuitive and easy to understand.

> To learn more about building components using JSX in Solid, visit the [components & props](/essentials/components-and-props) page.

Reviewer 3: I think the learn more and the how to paragraphs can be put in Aside components, since they're kinda like hints
